>>Fanciful tales have long been
told of a magic spring which
could restore the youth
of anyone who drinks
of it or bathes in its waters.
These legends have
spawned many ventures
in search of the fabled
fountain of youth.
In this modern age,
the search continues,
but the quest has been taken
up by scientists exploring
immortality upon a new
frontier-- within the nucleus
of our cells.
It is here where we find little
packets of genetic material
called genes, arranged along
twisted, double stranded
molecules of DNA
called chromosomes.
The tip of the chromosomes
are capped with telomeres,
and it is here
where we may finally
unlock the secrets of
the fountain of youth.
>>All plants,
animals, fungi have
chromosomes that
are like bow ties,
and at ends are these tips.
The tips are like
firecracker fuses.
>>You think of a
chromosome like a shoelace.
The caps, or aglets,
on your shoelaces
are equivalent to the
telomeres on the chromosomes.
The telomere protects
the chromosome.
>>And they're actually
made up of DNA codes.
And when our cells
divide, they break off.
And every time they break
off, it prevents the cells
from dividing that many times.
>>With every cell replication,
a little bit of that chromosome
is lost.
With every cell.
Let's say it's a white blood
cell, muscle cell, or a heart
cell.
We lose a little bit.
That doesn't make much of a
difference in a year, or 10
years, or 15 years, or 30 years.
But in 100 years, it
makes a huge difference.
>>We all know that when
the aglets on our shoelaces
get shorter, our shoelaces
start to fall apart.
Well, the same is true
for our chromosomes.
When the telomeres on our
chromosomes get short,
our chromosomes
start to fall apart.
>>Generally, a
lifetime-- your cells
can only divide about 50 times,
and then they stop dividing.
Goes into senescence,
and we die.
>>Chromosomes start
falling apart,
our cells lose the ability
to function normally.
And every single disease
you've ever heard of
has now been connected to
the length of the telomeres.
When they get short,
it causes-- it's not
the only thing that causes,
but it plays a big role
in causing practically
every age-related
and even non-age-related
ailment that we've heard of.
>>And this is not fringe theory.
This is the fundamental
bedrock of molecular biology.
Those chromosomes
will recombine.
They'll cause
mutations, and we're
off to cellular dysfunction
and maybe death.
>>Mutations occur
just from-- let's say,
one way is from the
chromosomes rearranging.
So, when a chromosome breaks
and rejoins, that's a mutation.
And so it essentially puts
the expression machinery
to express a gene under
control or some other gene.
And so all these
chromosomal rearrangements
occur, and mutations and stuff.
And those appear to
be the mutations that
actually cause cancer.
>>Telomeres are shortening, and
they're causing genetic damage.
And so if it manifests in the
pancreas, you get diabetes.
In the brain, you
get Alzheimer's.
I believe it's one
disease with many faces.
And the nice thing
is, at the core of it,
the cells are able to
recognize their dysfunction.
They kill themselves
so the body is
in a constant state of renewal.
And the ecology is set up
so that we can live forever.
>>What this seems to
suggest is that nature
has program at our bodies
to age and eventually die.
The shortening of telomeres
is integral to this process.
>>It was discovered
that telomeres
get shorter as we age.
And there seemed to be a strong
correlation between the length
of your telomeres and
your overall age--
but more importantly, the
length of your telomeres
and your overall health.
People started noticing that
there were some people that
were really sick
at young ages-- had
short telomeres
like old people do.
And so there was a big
correlation that's determined.
And people started speculating
that maybe this had
something to do with our
health and our aging.
>>The length of that telomere
is correlated to your age.
And the shorter that it
is, the older you are.
And so all the symptoms
associated with aging
are related to the
length of that telomere.
>>I believe there's a lot of
things that cause us to age.
And I think of each of
them as a stick of dynamite
that's burning inside of us.
So really, what matters
is which stick of dynamite
has the shortest fuse.
And humans, dogs, cats,
horses, sheep, pig, and deer
are the only ones that have
been shown so far to actually
have telomere shortening
be their shortest fuse.
The aging has actually
occurred by the changes
in gene expression.
We've been able-- at least when
human cells in Petri dishes
show that when we
re-lengthen the telomeres,
the genes actually go back
to the exact, same expression
patterns that they had
when they were young.
>>There are now some tests
that are available that
will tell patients how
long their telomeres are,
and also what percentage of
them are particularly short.
And this is very valuable
information to know,
because it's essentially a
yardstick for how we are aging.
>>So ideally, what
you want is to be
able to measure not just
the length of telomeres,
how much wick is left on
the candle or firecracker.
What you want to know
is how much damage
has gone on in the chromosome.
>>With over 10,000
scientific articles
published about
telomeres, scientists
have been working hard to
unlock the key to aging.
In 2009, the Nobel Prize
for physiology and medicine
was awarded to
three scientists who
discovered how an enzyme called
telomerase impacts telomere
length.
>>The holy grail of
medicine is looking
for telomerase, which
is an enzyme that
restores the length
of the telomeres
so that your cells
can divide forever.
>>So telomerase
is an enzyme that
can correct any damage
to the chromosome
end, which is the telomere.
>>And one of the
first things we did
was to put it into normal skin
cells grown in a Petri dish,
and we found they
became immortal--
by the scientist
definition of immortal,
meaning that they never
reached the Hayflick limit.
They never got senescent.
They just kept dividing,
and dividing, and dividing.
>>A cell can be immortal.
Like all your sperm and
eggs, they're immortal.
They transmit forever because
they have active telomerase.
>>By using telomerase to
immortalize human cells,
scientists hope to find a
cure for a host of diseases,
and maybe even stop
or reverse aging.
Until this miracle
cure comes through,
there are things that we
can do in our everyday lives
to promote longevity.
>>So the idea in science-- it's
been around for a long time--
has been to figure out if
there's a way to actually heal
the end of the DNA instead
of losing something or just
stopping the damage.
Is there a way to actually
restore it and get it
back to the original
shoelace end
that we got when we bought
our shoes brand new.
>>There's quite
a bit of research
now showing that there are
a few things that increase
the length of the telomeres.
>>Some things that you
can do that are simple
is to-- they make
a lot of sense.
Get good exercise.
Get plenty of deep sleep.
Drink green tea.
Take antioxidants.
Those are all lifestyle
choices that you
can make that will keep
your telomeres long.
>>Vitamin D, omega 3 fatty
acids, endurance exercise.
>>Raw fruit and vegetables
right off the vine, and grapes,
and raw leaves.
They've discovered
herbs from China
and various kinds of
things that increase
the length of telomeres.
>>This is a really big deal
in terms of what this means.
It's possible to
actually get in there
and correct cellular
damage and genetic damage,
and de-age ourself.
And create the potential
of living not only
to be 100, but 200 or 300.
>>It is through healthy
lifestyle choices--
stress reduction
techniques and exercise--
that one can slow the rate
of telomere shortening
and perhaps enjoy a
longer, healthier life.
That is, until
science rediscovers
the real fountain of youth.